release(ai-gateway): AI Gateway 2.0 (#5385)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/ai-gateway/kongctl.md

> If you're coming from {{site.ai_gateway}} 1.x, which used decK and Gateway plugins, see the [v2 migration guide](/ai-gateway/v2-migration-guide/) for how to move to the kongctl-managed entity model.

{{site.ai_gateway}} resources are regional.
Make sure your active kongctl profile's `konnect.region` matches the region where your {{site.ai_gateway}} lives (`us`, `eu`, `au`, `me`, `in`, or `sg`).
See [Configuration of kongctl](/kongctl/config/) for how to set this.

## Declarative configuration

In declarative mode, you describe the desired state of your resources in declarative configuration files and kongctl calculates and applies the diff.
This is the recommended approach for most {{site.ai_gateway}} configuration because it lets you store configuration in source control and apply it safely at any time.

The {{site.ai_gateway}} [how-to guides](/how-to/?products=ai-gateway) use this approach.

### Workflow

Use the following workflow to manage {{site.ai_gateway}} resources declaratively:

1. Write a configuration file describing the resources you want.
2. Run `kongctl plan -f example.yaml` to preview what will change (optional but recommended).

> 3. Run `kongctl apply -f example.yaml` to create or update resources.

Reviewer: I'm not sure these should be numbered lists, i would say this is more of a bullet list with suggested commands. It's not really sensible to run apply and then sync like this. It's more about explaining to them some commands they have available.

> 4. Run `kongctl sync -f example.yaml` when you want kongctl to also delete resources that are no longer in the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Run `kongctl sync -f example.yaml` when you want kongctl to also create, update, or delete resources. See the [kongctl sync reference](/kongctl/sync/) for more detail on sync behavior.
```

For example, this configuration file creates an {{site.ai_gateway}}:

```yaml
_defaults:
  kongctl:
    namespace: my-namespace

ai_gateways:
  - ref: my-ai-gateway
    name: my-ai-gateway
```

Save this as `ai-gateway.yaml`, then preview what will change:

```bash
kongctl plan -f ai-gateway.yaml --pat "$KONNECT_TOKEN"
```

Then apply:

```bash
kongctl apply -f ai-gateway.yaml --pat "$KONNECT_TOKEN"

> ```

Reviewer: Here is the more idiomatic way to instruct the user for this. I can explain why out of this PR if you'd like

--- snip

Save this as `ai-gateway.yaml`, then preview what will change:

```bash
kongctl diff --mode apply -f ai-gateway.yaml --pat "$KONNECT_TOKEN"
```

Then apply, confirming the changes if you approve:

```bash
kongctl apply -f ai-gateway.yaml --pat "$KONNECT_TOKEN"
```

---end snip

Reviewer 2: This makes sense - I vaguely remember having a similar conversation about this for KEG too.

### Resource schemas

To look up field names and required fields for any resource type, use `kongctl explain`:

```bash
kongctl explain ai_gateway_model_providers
```

Use `kongctl scaffold` to generate starter YAML for a resource type:

```bash
kongctl scaffold ai_gateway_model_providers
```

See the [kongctl declarative resource reference](/kongctl/supported-resources/#ai-gateway) for all supported resource types.

### Adopting an existing {{site.ai_gateway}}

If you create an {{site.ai_gateway}} using declarative configuration, kongctl tracks it in the namespace automatically.

If an {{site.ai_gateway}} already exists in {{site.konnect_product_name}} (for example, one provisioned outside of kongctl), use [`kongctl adopt`](/kongctl/adopt/) to bring it into a namespace before managing it declaratively:

```sh
kongctl adopt ai-gateway "$AI_GATEWAY_ID" \
    --namespace my-namespace \
    --pat "$KONNECT_TOKEN"
```

`adopt` registers the existing {{site.ai_gateway}} with a kongctl namespace so it can be tracked.
Pre-existing resources need to be adopted before kongctl includes them in plan and sync operations.

> 

Reviewer: then we need to mention `kongctl dump` here.  The typical workflow is... A user for example creates an AI Gateway in the UI.  They run `kongctl adopt <arguments>` to give the AI GW the label, then `kongctl dump declarative <arguments>` to dump out a file representing the configuraiton of the AI gateway.  Then that dumped file has the configuration they can use going forward.

You can reference the {{site.ai_gateway}} in your configuration files using `_external`.
`_external` tells kongctl to look up the resource without taking ownership of it in the current configuration.
For example, here the gateway is managed (adopted), but not owned by this configuration file:

```yaml
ai_gateways:
  - ref: my-ai-gateway
    _external:
      selector:
        matchFields:
          name: "my-ai-gateway"

ai_gateway_model_providers:
  - ref: openai-primary
    ai_gateway: my-ai-gateway
    name: openai-primary
    type: openai
    config:
      auth:
        type: basic
        name: Authorization
        value: "Bearer !env OPENAI_API_KEY"

> ```

Reviewer: I would move the concept of _external out form the Adopt header and give it it's own section. it's a different concept
